---
title: Sacred Space in Practice
shortTitle: Practice
weight: 400
date: 2022-12-09T20:58:43.439Z
---
<!--StartFragment-->

The most important aspect of belief regarding the Ajmer Sharif is baraka, the spiritual power possessed by a person or object. Most importantly, baraka is contagious. Mu’in al-Din possessed baraka by being a saint, and his power continues to permeate the tomb and everything within it, including its devotees. This concept can be used to explain the practices at the Ajmer Sharif: kissing the tomb, eating the rose petals which have touched the tomb, touching the chadars (cloths) which adorn it, eating the food cooked within it–these rituals are attempts to receive baraka. This is not to say, however, that the Ajmer Sharif’s benefit is limited to the spiritual–many pilgrims travel to ask Saint Mu’in al-Din for a favor, or for prosperity. Thus, pilgrims’ motivations for visiting the Ajmer Sharif can vary greatly based on their goals.

The earliest mention of religious practice with regard to the Ajmer Sharif is from the late 16th century, when Emperor Akbar made arrangements for the “treatment of pilgrims” at the Ajmer Sharif. In the seventeenth century, Dutch merchant Francicso Pelsaert noted the “costly tomb at Ajmer, whither pilgrims journey annually from distant places.” Around the same time, French traveler Jean de Thevenot noted how pilgrims came to Ajmer from many different parts of India. These accounts indicate the popularity of the Ajmer Sharif as a pilgrimage destination for the past five centuries.

The most common reason to visit the tomb is to ask Saint Mu’in al-Din for a favor. This practice is centuries old: in the section of this website titled “History of the Ajmer Sharif,” we noted that Emperor Akbar attributed the birth of his son to his prayers at the Ajmer Sharif. In P.M. Currie’s The Shrine and Cult of Mu’in al-Din Chishti, the author describes a similar situation, in which a cow-herd couple went to Ajmer Sharif to pray for a child. After ten years of trying for children, they soon had three sons. When asked about their good luck, the husband replied “all my milk his from \[Mu’in al-Din].” As Currie notes, however, most pilgrims do not ask for specific wishes, but for general prosperity. When pilgrims ask for such favors, they tie a string to one of the marble screens surrounding the dargah. When the saint answers the pilgrim’s prayers, the pilgrim comes back, unties the string, and makes an offering to the shrine. This practice of asking for favors represents the shrines material benefit; however, being a reservoir of baraka, it also has great spiritual benefit.

The most common way of tapping into this spiritual power is through physical interaction. In footage of crowds entering the dargah, it is common to see devotees touch the walls as they enter. For example, at 13:23 in the video linked below, a man stretches out his arms to touch the walls, and then brings his hands to his forehead while entering. Another custom is to bow low and kiss the tomb upon entering. These gestures mark the transmission of baraka. By coming into contact with the shrine, the devotees passively acquire its spiritual power; however, these gestures are also forms of showing respect for Mu’in al-Din.

> [\> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JUr37Qbt0ok](<> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JUr37Qbt0ok>)

Another form of respect is to bring offerings, the most common of which are rose petals and chadars. The offering of rose petals stems from an Islamic tradition in which Muhammad described the red rose as a manifestation of Allah’s glory. These rose petals, having come into contact with the tomb of Mu’in al-Din, are imbued with baraka. Some are given away to be eaten, thus transmitting the petal’s baraka to the devotee. The chadars are brought by groups of pilgrims, and their construction varies from the cheapest materials to embroidered silks and velvets. As the pilgrims carry the large cloth through the streets leading to the shrine, onlookers touch it as it passes them, perhaps as a way of indirectly coming into contact with the tomb. Thus, both chadars and rose petals are part of the ongoing transmission of baraka at the Ajmer Sharif.

The largest income of offerings occurs during the Urs festival, which occurs on the anniversary of Mu’in al-Din’s death. The most important event of the Urs is the nightly samā, a Sufi ceremony which includes singing, dancing, and the recitation of poetry and prayer. The music of the samā is played loudly on speakers so that even those who were too late to find a seat may listen from outside the audience hall. During the samā, devotees pass around a bowl of rose water which has been used to wash the tomb–some devotees are allowed to take sips before the rest is sprinkled over the congregation. This too, is a form of transmitting Mu’in al-Din’s spiritual power.

The sixth and final day of the Urs is the most auspicious: pilgrims fill every street and courtyard around the Ajmer Sharif as the call to prayer is broadcast via a public address system. Some devotees arrive hours in advance to be close to the dargah during the final prayer. After this prayer is over, a khuddām (servant to the shrine) fires a gun, and the pilgrims disperse. The servants then wash the mausoleum with rose water, which is later sold to pilgrims as tabarruk (a blessed item). This desire for proximity to the shrine–through physical distance and through the consumption of rose water– further indicates the devotees’ desire for baraka.

The Ajmer Sharif’s most noticeable daily practice is likely the distribution of food. This practice stems from the Chishti khānqāhs (Sufi houses of rest), which had open kitchens for passing travelers. The Ajmer Sharif still houses the large cauldron donated by Emperor Akbar, which is used every day to produce 4800 kg of food. This food is then given to pilgrims and the destitute as another source of tabarruk. The designation of tabarruk indicates that this distribution is not only an act of charity, but also another example of the transmission of Mu’in al-Din’s baraka at the Ajmer Sharif.

Thus, while modern Muslim nationalists might decry Sufi pilgrimage for being influenced by Hinduism, the Ajmer Sharif’s main spiritual benefit is through the Islamic notion of baraka. Any association with Hinduism is likely due to regional intersections, not religious influence.



<!--EndFragment-->